# BoolODE
Git Repo for converting Boolean models to ODE models and performing stochastic simulations.

# Usage
`python src/BoolODE.py --path=data/variables.txt --max-time=200 --num-timepoints=10 --num-experiments=3`

# Options 
Usage: BoolODE.py [options]

Options:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  --path=PATH           Path to boolean model file 
  --max-time=MAX\_TIME   Total time of simulation. (Default = 20)
  --num-timepoints=NUM\_TIMEPOINTS
                        Number of time points to sample. (Default = 100)
  --num-experiments=NUM\_EXPERIMENTS
                        Number of experiments to perform. (Default = 30)
  -n, --normalize-trajectory
                        Min-Max normalize genes across all experiments
  -i, --identical-pars  Set single value to similar parameters NOTE: Consider
                        setting this if you are using --sample-pars.
  -s, --sample-pars     Sample rate parameters around the hardcoded means ,
                        using 10% stand. dev.
  --write-protein       Write both protein and RNA values to file. Useful for
                        debugging.
  -b, --burn-in         Treats the first 25% of the time course as burnin ,
                        samples from the rest.
  --outPrefix=OUTPREFIX
                        Prefix for output files.
  --inputs=INPUTS       Path to input parameter files
  --ics=ICS             Path to list of initial conditions
  --strengths=STRENGTHS
                        Path to list of interaction strengths
  --species-type=SPECIES_TYPE
                        Path to list of molecular species type file.Useful to
                        specify proteins/genes

# Output
BoolODE produces the following output files:
1. parameters.txt - list of parameters and the corresponding values generated by BoolODE
2. refNetwork.csv - An edgelist with signs of interactions inferred from the model file
3. PseudoTime.csv - BoolODE uses simulated time as a proxy for pseudotime. This file is used as input to BEELINE
4. PseudoTime-dropped.csv - Same as PseudoTime.csv, but experiments with 'low' overall gene expression are dropped
5. ExpressionData.csv - The table of gene expression values per 'cell'. For explanation of the format, see below.
6. ExpressionData-dropped.csv - Same as ExpressionData.csv, but experiments with 'low' overall gene expression are dropped.
7. stoch_experiment.txt - Unprocessed output from BoolODE. 

The ExpressionData.csv file has rows corresponding to the genes, and
columns corresponding to the timepoints in each experiment.  For
example, `[E0_0,E0_10,E0_20,E1_0,E1_10,E1_20]` shows two experiments
with 3 timepoints, at times 0,10,20 respectively.

If you use BoolODE in your research, please cite:

Aditya Pratapa, Amogh Jalihal, Jeffrey Law, Aditya Bharadwaj, and T M Murali. Benchmarking algorithms for gene regulatory network inference from single-cell transcriptomic data, bioRxiv (2019). doi.org/10.1101/642926
